You were telling me about working and going to
school and how you, how you, you know, can do
something for yourself if you really take the
opportunity.
That was going to give you something. Oh, yeah,
but, yes. The trouble has been also in the
educational circles of the Anglo-American that
the writers of history have not written the truth
have slanted the historical events to their own
liking and even their school taxes texts and books
they have had misinformation
particularly by some individual who was not at all
adequately prepared to write in the textbooks for
the state of Texas. I remember distinctly,
I think it was in the fifth grade, and I was in, I
think in Bailey School, in which the teacher got me
to stand up to read a joke from the geography
textbook furnished by the school system in the
discussion of Texas. It says, Texas has great
centers of education and industry. To wit,
Dallas, Houston, San Antonio, in El Paso. But El
Paso, San Antonio
is
troubled because of the racial condition. The
population, a great part of the population of San
Antonio and El Paso are Mexicans, and they are
ignorant and illiterate.
The teacher said, Frank, you don't want to be
ignorant, and you don't want to be illiterate, do
you, Frank? I said, no, and I think this book is a big
liar. And I threw it down. I was in Bailey School.
When I was probably in the fifth grade, the
teacher, Mrs. Lapp, asked me to stand up and read
out to the class. What did she say when you threw it
down? She said I was a bad boy.
How much of the problem has been in the school
teachers, do you think? Were they Did they just not
know anything, or were they unaware of the
background? Some of those crude teachers were
within the category that I have mentioned before,
carpetbaggers and scalawags. This is when you say
the trouble really began. You don't think there
was that much problem between the Anglos and the
people who had come, well, who were there to begin
with from Mexico prior to the Civil War? I don't
think there was. I think the Civil War was a factor
by the migration of the citizens from the north or
unethical citizens that wanted to usurp the areas
or wanted to not only usurp but wanted to take
advantage of the situation and enrich themselves
probably through economic means gradually
started developing a inferior
type of class of citizens than they themselves
because they were the conquering type we had been
subjugated to their whims and desires Now, I think
that continued to go on. And, of course, the
descendants of these people took it for granted
that the philosophies of the
individuals before their ancestors was right.
And that there was a class distinction in Texas and
El Paso When
I was going to the university,
I would come to El Paso for the summer vacations,
and I got me a job as a traveling salesman
with a local clothing store. And I made a trip from
El Paso to Alpine. From Alpine, I went, I think, to a
little to the north, Odessa, ranking.
And what was the name
of that large city in comparison to the other
little towns? What was the name of that city?
Anyway, I went to a hotel.
And I registered. And the individual at this hotel
told me that because of the Cattlemen's
Convention, there was no room available.
So I inquired as to what to do. Finally, he
suggested that I should go to a Protestant
preacher's home, but he had a room available for
me. So I went to this Protestant, I don't know
whether he was a Methodist preacher or a Baptist.
And they were waiting for me, and they gave me
shelter and made me feel at home.
Then Later, I went downtown. I was peddling as a
drummer, clothing, men's clothing.
And finally it dawned on me later on that the reason
I didn't get a hotel room was because of racial
discrimination. Well, how did they identify you
as being Mexican American? I don't know, I guess,
the manner in which I was dressed, prepared. I
found probably that I was a peddler and looking for
the Mexican customers. And we were in the business
of selling exclusively to the young Mexican
individuals. And what were they doing in that
particular area around Odessa? What was their
livelihood, these customers? Employees,
working people. What's the name of that city? San
Angelo? No. It's between
north of Vegas. And I mean north of
Alpine, between Pecos and Alpine.
I can't even think of a city in that area. I'll look
on the map. Cattle, cattle country. Anyway, all
along, That line from Odessa, not Odessa, Pecos,
not Pecos either. But there are two different
fields of travel. The southern and the center
route. Not Odessa, but Ranking, whatever the
other, Ranking, Texas, another town.
All along that area, the oiled country, in one of
the railroad stations, they had a sign. Negro and
Mexican don't let the sun set on your head here.
That was in 1928, 30, 19...
And by 1933, I saw that. Now, in Pecos, also,
there's a lot of racial discrimination.
Outspoken racial discrimination. And it was so
much worse at the early days, or right before the
World War II. Well,
I'm wondering how much of this do you suppose was
related to the very large number of people who did
come in from Mexico? From 1910 on up through the
early 1940s, was there a fear or a feeling of being
threatened by the large number of immigrants? Or
do you think this was immaterial? I think that was
immaterial about what they felt. Here's the
reason of the influx or increase of the Mexican
population in the United States. We had, during
World War I, scarcity of employees. And the same
thing took place in World War II. The United States
had to import
railroad trackmen, and they used to call them the
ring duchies, through El Paso. to the eastern part
and central part of the united states as far as
chicago now chicago has a big mexican colony
because during the two wars the united states was
in dire need of labor class of people and they
imported these labors from mexico and the labors
that were imported in the into the United States
during those areas or eras were people of low
educational attainments. They were very
distinguishable in their appearance from the
rest of the inhabitants of the United States. They
were very easy identifiable by the manner in which
they dressed and where they lived And
consequently, that phase of our history gave rise
to the superiority or a feeling of superiority by
those Anglo-Americans who had been in the United
States and saw these coolies, these track
laborers, uneducated bunch of people swarming
into the cities of the United States.
Consequently, that appearance gave these people
a brand of inferior people, of ignorant, of
laborers, of that which was part of a second class
of our society. But then this has been applied or
was applied generally to anyone who was of Mexican
descent, regardless of? I would think so. The
majority of that feeling came about into
existence by those conditions.
So you really have the two factors then, the
post-Civil War reaction, the attempt to
subjugate people, and then added to that the large
number of laborers who then, as a group, everyone
was identified with that particular group. In the
employment of these laboring groups from Mexico,
they were segregated into a particular area. And
they were given homes or places in which to live or
bunk houses of an inferior quality. And
consequently, the other people who would see that
would take it for granted that they were slaves,
they were under
class of a type of an underclass of people. Well,
it's
beginning to get late, but I would like to finish
just getting my record down here on your
particular family. You say your mother's family
all stayed in Mexico, the Matas. The Matas family
all remained in Mexico. Do you ever visit back and
forth with these cousins? Some of these Matas have
migrated into the United States.
Did they come here? After, yes. After the
end of the revolution. Were they pretty well wiped
out financially by the revolution? Oh, yes. The
majority of his other relatives, when they came to
the United States, they had very, very small, if I
would say economically, broke.
And then, were there any other children on your
father's side, or was it just Guadalupe Galvan?
Guadalupe and Blas, B-L-A-S Galvan, and they had
a, he was, he entered the United States Sometime
after we came here and
went to New Mexico, married,
and died in New Mexico. Not any issue. Did he come?
He came during the revolution, though. Yes, he
came during the revolution. And then in your
family, the children were, let's see, the oldest
was? Helen. Ellen.
And she married... D.R. Patton.
And they had three... Three children. Three
children who were... Hazel. Hazel. Um... Hmm?
I just gave you her name. I know, I've got it on the
tape. There's another girl, and...
And George. George.
And then, let's see, the next oldest child was...
Josephine. Josephine.
And... Did she marry? Yes, she married a Frenchman
by the name of Duplanques
in her later years.
No children. No children. She became a furrier
here in El Paso. She has a galvan fur shop from which
she retired about four years ago. Economically,
very well to do. And then the next child was? Oscar.
He married
and had two children. Oscar Jr., who's a lawyer.
Where does Oscar Jr. live? Here in El Paso. And he's
married? Married. And Alfred Lee, who's a
Catholic priest.
What did Oscar do? Lawyer. He's a lawyer in the
United States government.
And then after Oscar was? Raymond. Raymond.
He's the one that went to California and worked
himself to a very executive position with a
telephone company. And his children? No
children. No children. Married, but no children.
And the next child was? Frank. Got you. And your
wife's from Brazil. And do you have any children?
No children. We raised Oscar and Albert Lee. I
mean, helped him financially. OK. Then this is
Frank then. Robert, the judge.
He's married and has two children. You raised
Oscar and Albert. Yeah. You see, Oscar passed
away. Oh, I see. He died young. He died. They became
orphans. Mm-hmm. His wife died, too. No, his wife
is alive. Oh, but you helped raise him. Okay, then
Robert is a lawyer. Judge of the county court at law
number one. And he married? Emma, and they have two
children.
And their children, what are their children?
Robert Jr. and Victoria.
And Robert is a, what does Robert do? Robert Jr.
Students. They're students.
And the next child was? Henry. Henry. Now after
this, these were all born in the United States.
Right. Henry. No, Henry, pardon me. We got Robert
here. Who's this? That's Robert. Yeah, well,
Henry should be before Robert. Okay. And Henry?
Henry married, worked as a laborer
at
what's the name of that
packing company? He passed away about two years
ago. Did he have any children? He had
Oscar, another Oscar, Carlos,
Lawrence, Martha.
They're all students. They're all students. Are
they high school? University levels. All
university students. Except one, the little girl
Martha, she's going to high school. What does his
wife do? She's a widow. He died.
How is she affording to send these children
through university?
I see. And then... Were there any other children?
Julie. Julie? Julia May. She was born here in the
States. She got married, divorced. She's a school
teacher. She went to Denton School for Girls. And
she's teaching here in El Paso. Right.
And of course, after that, we had...
Lawrence, did I say Lawrence? He passed away when
he was a kid going to school.
I guess that's all. I like to, we've talked about
these people and by writing them down I can
remember who it was. Well, I'm going to have to meet
my husband in a little while. He'll wonder where I
am.